Support file (#220)
nodejs/package-maintenance: docs/drafts/PACKAGE-SUPPORT.md

# Baseline practice - Document support levels

Package maintainers provide different level of support in the large npm ecosystem.
A mismatch between the support a maintainer is planning to
provide and that expected by a consumer of a module will cause
friction and stress on both the package maintainer and
the consumer. This is further complicated because the level of support
provided for dependencies of a package may be different than that
targeted by the package a consumer is directly consuming.

This baseline practice suggests a standardized set of information to
quantify the level of support that a package maintainer wishes/is able to
provide. The goal is to close the gap between the expectations from the
consumer and those of the maintainer and reduce the friction and stress
that can arise due to the gap.

There are 4 main dimensions that we standardize in this practice which are:  

* `target`: the level of support that the package maintainer aims to provide
* `response`: how quickly the maintainer chooses to, or is able to, respond to issues
* `response-paid`: how quickly the maintainer will respond to issues if paid

> * `backing`: how the project is supported

Reviewer: We would need to include `funding` here if we are going to include it in the examples.

In addition a `url` field can optionally be provided with a link to more detailed
support information.

For each of these dimensions the potential options are not an ordered list.
Instead like licenses each ID will identify a unique option. If you wish to
identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within
this document considered "custom" and may ignored for flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

## Support file

The support informations are stored in a `support.json` file 
The recommended baseline practice is to include a file named `support.json` in the root direcotry of the project.

This file documents the maintainers expectations adding more useful metadata.

The file expects this example structure:

A `support` field with a `versions` key.
`versions` is an array of JSON that contains all the useful information detailed below.

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {

>         "version": "<=1",

Reviewer 2: Is ordering important for this array? Like if we have conflicting rules `<=3` and `<=2`

Reviewer 3: presumably this is any valid semver range?

Reviewer 2: Nothing indicates version semantics in the current spec. I think only including major would be enough for most of the cases but if we want to allow any semver, something should prevent such range conflicts.

Reviewer 3: Why would it conflict? Like licensing, they’d both apply and a user could pick whichever.

Reviewer 2: The conflict is that if author unsupport <=2 and put <=3 under maintenance, we need to apply first rule for 1.x but second also applies :) (for a tool that checks version support status, this order is important in case of conflicts)

Reviewer 3: I’m saying that they both apply. Whatever entails the most support wins. If they want to avoid the conflict, they have to expire the most-supporting one.

Reviewer 3: In other words, each entry stands alone and is unaffected by other entries. If you have one entry saying everything is supported, and another saying nothing is, then everything is.

Author: Yes, the idea that the user can define a semver range (without introducing other formats) and if there are conflicts it is up to the maintainer solve it or support all the ranges.

Reviewer 2: Agree. Requiring maintainer to use proper ranges is enough. What do you think if we use `^1.0.0` in the provided example as a better practice? Using `<=` range potentially ends up into conflicts when used for more than one major.

Reviewer 3: `>=` should work, but `^` is better in the example - just like in real semver in package ranges.

Author: done 👍

        "target": "abandoned",
        "response": "none",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": [
          "paid-support",
          "sponsored"
        ],

>         "expires": "2019-08-01T20:47:27.840Z",

Reviewer 2: if `support.json` is being maintained by hand it is probably hard calculating ISO time and updating this field. Alternatively, if we use `<duration> <unit>` format like `"1 year"` or `6 months` it can be automatically calculated relative to the last release in that semver range. easier to maintain, automatically renew and more readable.

Example: expiry of `3 months` for `version<=2`:

1.2.0 released at 2019/08/01 <-- this release is supported until 2019/11/01
1.3.0 released at 2019/09/01 <-- this release is supported until 2019/12/01

Author: Yes, you are right! I will update it

Author: done 👍

        "contact": {
          "url": "http://support.it/issue",
          "security": "mailto:security@nodejs.com",
          "paid-channel": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
        },
        "funding": {
          "open-collective": "",
          "btc": ""
        }
      },
      {
        "version": ">=2.0.0",
        "target": "lts",
        "response": "regular-7",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": "hobby",
        "expires": "2021-08-01T20:47:27.840Z",
        "contact": {
          "url": "http://support.it/issue",
          "security": "mailto:security@nodejs.com",
          "paid-channel": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
        },
        "funding": {
          "open-collective": "",
          "btc": ""
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should most often be:

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "*",
        "target": "lts",
        "response": "best-effort",
        "backing": [
          "hobby",

>           "sponsored"

Reviewer: I think we might leave "sponsored" out of the default as I'm not sure that most packages have any sponsorhip.

| `bounty`       | The package is maintained through the use of a bounty service
| `project`      | The package is maintained under the auspices of a larger project (ex Node.js project).
| `foundation`   | The package is maintained and supported under the auspices of a Foundation.
| `company`      | The package is maintained and supported by a corporate entity but may not be related to their product or service offerings.
| `commercial`   | The package is maintained and supported by a corporate entity as part of supporting their products.
| `paid-support` | The package is maintained and supported through paid support contracts.
| `freemium`     | Basic version of the package it provided for free, premium version is available at a cost.

## Support `expires`

The expire field is a string in ISO Date format which define the ending of the term of that support entry.

## Support `contact`

The contact field is a JSON that show to users all the possible channels to contact the maintainer:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Markdown is rendered like :

```json
"contact": {
  "url": "http://support.it/issue", // URL to the issues tracker
  "security": "mailto:security@nodejs.com", // A contact for security issues
  "paid-channel": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com" // A direct contact for paid support
},
```

But can be rendered like:

```json5
"contact": {
  "url": "http://support.it/issue", // URL to the issues tracker
  "security": "mailto:security@nodejs.com", // A contact for security issues
  "paid-channel": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com" // A direct contact for paid support
},
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```json5
```

Reviewer 3: alternatively, use normal json comments:
```json
{
  “url”: “url to the tracker”,
  “url”: “google.com”
}
```

Reviewer 4: IMO comments are not neccessary here. The property names should be self-explanatory (and on that subject, `paid-channel` might not be).

Author: I will try to write better for those fields to avoid comments. 👍

Author: done + some changes 👍

"contact": {
  "url": "http://support.it/issue", // URL to the issues tracker
  "security": "mailto:security@nodejs.com", // A contact for security issues
  "paid-channel": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com" // A direct contact for paid support
},
```

## Support `funding`

This field should track all the possibilities to fund the project to receive a paid support.

```json
"funding": {
  "open-collective": "",

>   "btc": ""

Reviewer: I think that `funding` overlaps with backing.  Maybe we can add some variations to `backing` which cover these options.  In particular "open-collective" seems to fit pretty well with backing?

Author: I'll try to fix this conflict 👍

Author: Done

# Baseline practice - Document support levels

Package maintainers, in a wide variety of ecosystems, provide different
levels of support. A mismatch between the support a maintainer is planning to
provide and that expected by a consumer of a package will cause
friction and stress on both the package maintainer and
the consumer. This is further complicated because the level of support
provided for dependencies of a package may be different than that
targeted by the package a consumer is directly consuming.

> In the case of JavaSCript (Node.js and Broswer) there is a large ecosystem

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of JavaScript (node.js and browsers) there is a large ecosystem
```

identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within
this document considered "custom" and may ignored or flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

## Support information

This field documents the maintainers’ expectations, adding more useful metadata.
For the JavaScript ecosystem it is recommended that this information be added to the existing
`package.json` file in the root directory of the project. For other ecosystems, it is recommended that
this information be stored in a file called `package-support.json` in the root directory of the 
project.

The json which is either added to the `package.json` file or stored in `package-support.json` is
as defined in the sections below.  

The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should be:

```json
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "*",
        "target": { "node": "none" },
        "response": {"best-effort": {"url": "https://github.com/myproject"}},

>         "backing": { "hobby": },

Author: ```suggestion
        "backing": { "hobby": "https://github.com/myproject" },
```

Reviewer: @Eomm I don't seem to be able to accept this change, but looks good to me. Can you merge it?

Author: Yes! 
I wanted to be sure that suggestion was ok 👍

      }
    ]
}
```

This reflects that the maintainer in this case may have no interest in ensuring that the package works
outside of their use case.

### Support `versions`

The `versions` key is an array of objects, each of which contains information for a package version
range. The standardized fields include:

* version
* target
* response
* backing
* expires

### Support `version`

The support version accepts a [semver range](https://semver.io/) value that define the versions of the
package that applies that configuration.

Note that the `version` ranges could overlap each other: it means that the maintainers provide more
than one support type, and it is up to users choose the support level that best fits their need.

### Support `target`

The support target captures the platform versions that the package maintainer aims to support.
These options may be different for each ecosystem so the target uses a namespace in 
order to identify which values are expected.

The target field is an object in this format:

> { :"XXXX": [ ] }

Author: ```suggestion
{ "xxxx": [ ] }
```

where xxxx is the namespace identifier for the ecosystem and [ ] is either a string or an array
of strings indicating the platform versions that the package maintainer aims to support.

The standarized namespace identifiers are:

> * "node:"

Author: ```suggestion
* "node"
```

#### node name space

The standardized options for the node name space are as follows:

| Value         | example    | Description |
|---------------|------------|-------------|

> | xxxxxx        |            | were xxxxxx is a [semver range](https://semver.io/) of Node.js versions supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| xxxxxx        |            | where xxxxxx is a [semver range](https://semver.io/) of Node.js versions supported.
```

# Baseline practice - Document support levels

Package maintainers provide different level of support in the large npm ecosystem.
A mismatch between the support a maintainer is planning to

> provide and that expected by a consumer of a module will cause

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
provide and that expected by a consumer of a package will cause
```

friction and stress on both the package maintainer and
the consumer. This is further complicated because the level of support
provided for dependencies of a package may be different than that
targeted by the package a consumer is directly consuming.

This baseline practice suggests a standardized set of information to
quantify the level of support that a package maintainer wishes/is able to
provide. The goal is to close the gap between the expectations from the
consumer and those of the maintainer and reduce the friction and stress
that can arise due to the gap.

There are 4 main dimensions that we standardize in this practice which are:  

> * `target`: the level of support that the package maintainer aims to provide

Reviewer 3: maybe “level” isn’t the most accurate term here; this seems more like “the platform versions the maintainer aims to support”?

        "target": "lts",
        "response": "regular-7",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": "hobby",
        "expires": "P1M",
        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "http://support.it/issue"
          },
          "security": {
            "email": "mailto:security@nodejs.com"
          },
          "paid-channel": {
            "email": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should most often add this support field:

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "*",
        "target": "lts",
        "response": "best-effort",
        "backing": [ "hobby" ],
        "expires": "P1Y2M10DT2H30M",
        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "https://github.com/nodejs/package-maintenance/issues"
          },
          "security": {
            "email": "mailto:security@nodejs.com"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

This reflects that the maintainer in this case may have no interest in ensuring that the package works
outside of their use case.

### Support `versions`

> The `versions` key is an array of JSON that contains all the useful information regarding a defined

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `versions` key is an array of objects that contain all the useful information regarding a defined
```

> package version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
package version range.
```

### Support `version`

The support version accepts a [semver range](https://semver.io/) value that define the versions of the
module that applies that configuration.

Note that the `version` ranges could overlap each other: it means that the maintainers provide more
than one support type, and it is up to users choose the support level that best fits their need.

### Support `target`

> The support target captures the level of support that the package maintainer

Reviewer 3: Perhaps this should instead be an object that works like “engines” - that way versions of node, npm, browsers, etc, could all be specified, using these values *or* semver ranges

Reviewer: Likely you are suggesting: there was discussion elsewhere that it should be an object with the example being

target: { node: xxxx }

and other domains could use something other than `node`

I'm also think we should allow specific versions and SemVer ranges in order to cover all situations. The guidance would suggest that one of the standard one's is best but that would give the flexibility to express other specific case as well.  For example it supports Node.js 10.x only.

Reviewer 3: exactly my thinking.

Reviewer 5: Not saying it should not support the semver range, but I think this field should clarify the intent of the author, i.e. if it's a semver range, then it says "I only support node 10, and when node 12 comes out - ????", whereas a policy keyword says "I currently support node 10, and when node 12 becomes LTS - I will support that too".

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it should be an array then, where each item is either a keyword or a semver range?

Author: >  if it's a semver range, then it says "I only support node 10, and when node 12 comes out - ????"

I think in this case the value of the field should be `>=8.0.0 <8.x`. I'm not sure an array could simplify this use case

Reviewer 3: All of my packages would likely indicate `['0.6 || 0.8 || 0.10 || 0.12 || 4 || 6', 'lts']`, for example, and i'd add `|| 8` when 8 hits EOL, etc.

Reviewer: @dominykas I was thinking that the sermver range would allow package maintainers to cover cases where the policy keyword does not cover it.  Ideally/recommended would be to use one of the approaches covered by a defined policy keyword.

aims to provide.  The standardized options are as follows:

| Value         | Versions   | Description |
|---------------|------------|-------------|
| `abandoned`   |            | Not recommended for use. The package is deprecated or no longer maintained
| `none`        |            | Use at your own risk, no active support. May or may not work for a given Node.js version

> | `all`         | 8,10,11,12 | The package is maintained for versions of Node.js including both LTS and non-LTS releases. It may be necessary to accept semver-major level (ie. breaking) changes into that application in order to receive essential fixes. Documentation for the package will include the non-LTS releases for which the package is still maintained. 

Reviewer 3: This seems like maybe it should be “all-non-eol” or “all-supported” or something

Reviewer 6: "all-supported" sounds a little bit better than "all-non-eol"

Reviewer: I've used "maintained" in the update I'm about to push.

| `active`      | 10,12      | All releases not in maintenance
| `lts_active`  | 10         | All releases both LTS and active
| `lts_latest`  | 10         | The package is maintained only for the Latest Node.js version. You will be required to update to the latest LTS Node.js version in order to ensure you can use new versions/get security fixes
| `current`     | 12         | The latest release from "all"

Based on the current active Node.js releases which are 8.x (Maintenance LTS), 10.x (Active LTS) and 12.x (Current).

### Support `response` and `response-paid`

Support response quantifies how quickly the maintainer chooses to, or is able to, respond to issues:

| Value | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `none`         | Don't expect a response, the package is not being actively maintained
| `best-effort`  | The maintainer is interested in fixing/discussing issues, however, there should be no expectation on response times. If and when the maintainer has time they may respond.

> | `regular-7`    | There are dedicated resources who regularly maintain the module, expected response time is 7 days or less for a "we read your issue" response. Further work will depend on prioritization of the issue by the maintainer team.

Reviewer 3: instead of fixing to 1 or 7, perhaps this could be any integer?

Reviewer: I'd agree we could make it regular-X where X can be defined by the author.

It is a string in the [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) format.

This standard can express:
+ _a date_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z`): the value is the expiring date. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _time range_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z/2008-05-11T15:30:00Z`): the value is the range of validity of the supported version. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _only duration_ (ex: `P1Y2M10DT2H30M`): the value must be added to the last release date. This value is dynamic.

To understand if the version is expired or not, the user needs to do the operation for _duration_:

`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **>** `now` => the support is not expired
`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **<** `now` => the support is expired

### Support `contact`

The contact field is an object that shows to users all possible channels to contact maintainer(s):

- `security`: a contact for security issues
- `paid-channel`: a direct contact for paid support

Each field is an object with more information like an external URL, an email, or a project file.

```json
"contact": {
  "security": {

>     "file": "./SECURITY.md"

Reviewer 3: I think this needs to perhaps be a url; since github supports putting this file in an org-wide .github dir - so many repos may have a policy, but no in-repo file.

Reviewer: url makes sense as we use that later in the paid-channel as well.

  },
  "paid-channel": {
    "url": "http://support.it/paid-suport",

>     "email": "mailto:paid-channel@node.js"

Reviewer 3: this shouldn’t have mailto; it should probably instead be the same format as the “author” field, and be named something regarding a user instead of an email address specifically.

Author: with the last changes the format is now:

```
  {
    "type": "24-7",
    "paid": true,
    "contact": {
      "name": "xyz customer service",
      "url": "xyz.com/service",
      "email": "asd@asd.asd"
    }
  }
```

Maybe we could merge "name" and "email" in the field "accountable" with the same format as author as you suggested?

Reviewer 3: That object format seems fine to me, since it already matches the array-of-objects form of `author`; I'm suggesting that we be sure that `contact` matches everything `author` supports: string, object, or array-of-objects-or-strings, i believe.

Reviewer: I had chosen those from the author specifically.  Changes to make it match everything `author` supports makes sense to me.

Author: Updated 👍

consumes these elements.

## Support file

The support informations are stored in a `support.json` file.
The recommended baseline practice is to include a file named `support.json` in the root directory of the project.

This file documents the maintainers expectations adding more useful metadata.

The file expects this example structure:

A `support` field with a `versions` key.
`versions` is an array of JSON that contains all the useful information detailed below.

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "^1.0.0",
        "target": "abandoned",
        "response": "none",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": [
          "paid-support"
        ],
        "expires": "P1Y",
        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "http://support.it/issue"
          },
          "security": {
            "file": "./SECURITY.md"
          },
          "paid-channel": {
            "email": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
          }
        }
      },
      {
        "version": ">=2.0.0",
        "target": "lts",
        "response": "regular-7",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": "hobby",

>         "expires": "P1M3",

Reviewer 3: what is this notation? i don't find it very human readable.

Author: Yes, it is not immediately readable, but it is a [ISO 8601 Period value](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601#Durations). 
This will help to build tools around it

This baseline practice suggests a standardized set of information to
quantify the level of support that a package maintainer wishes/is able to
provide. The goal is to close the gap between the expectations from the
consumer and those of the maintainer and reduce the friction and stress
that can arise due to the gap.

There are 4 main dimensions that we standardize in this practice which are:  

* `target`: the level of support that the package maintainer aims to provide
* `response`: how quickly the maintainer chooses to, or is able to, respond to issues
* `response-paid`: how quickly the maintainer will respond to issues if paid
* `backing`: how the project can be supported

In addition a `url` field can optionally be provided with a link to more detailed
support information.

For each of these dimensions the potential options are not an ordered list.
Instead like licenses each ID will identify a unique option. If you wish to
identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within

> this document considered "custom" and may ignored for flagged by any tooling that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this document considered "custom" and may ignored or flagged by any tooling that
```

consumes these elements.

## Support information

> This field documents the maintainers expectations adding more useful metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This field documents the maintainers’ expectations, adding more useful metadata.
```

> The support information are stored in the `package.json` file in the root directory of the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The support information is stored in the `package.json` file in the root directory of the project.
```

The file expects this example structure:

```json
{
  "name": "my-package",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "a package.json file",
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "^1.0.0",
        "target": "abandoned",
        "response": "none",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": [
          "paid-support"
        ],
        "expires": "P1Y",
        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "http://support.it/issue"
          },
          "security": {
            "file": "./SECURITY.md"
          },
          "paid-channel": {
            "email": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
          }
        }
      },
      {
        "version": ">=2.0.0",
        "target": "lts",
        "response": "regular-7",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": "hobby",
        "expires": "P1M",
        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "http://support.it/issue"
          },
          "security": {
            "email": "mailto:security@nodejs.com"
          },
          "paid-channel": {
            "email": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
          }
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should most often add this support field:

Reviewer 3: do we have tooling available that can add this on a user’s behalf? also will we be PRring this into `npm init`?

Reviewer: There was work on a tool here: https://github.com/nodejs/package-compliant which we'll update once we have agreement on the format.

To start that should be able to validate the format is correct and we can likely make it add a default to the package.json as well. 

Longer term I'd like to see it in `npm init` as well as well as whatever the equivalents are for other package managers.

### Support `target`

The support target captures the level of support that the package maintainer
aims to provide.  The standardized options are as follows:

| Value | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `abandoned`  | Not recommended for use. The package is deprecated or no longer maintained.
| `none`       | Use at your own risk, no active support. May or may not work for a given Node.js version.
| `latest`     | The package is maintained only for the Latest Node.js versions. You will be required to update to the latest LTS Node.js version in order to ensure you can use new versions/get security fixes.
| `lts`        | The package is maintained for the Node.js LTS releases (both in Active and Maintenence mode). Anyone creating an application using an LTS version of Node.js and using the latest major version of LTS adopting modules will not have to accept semver-major level (ie. breaking) changes into that application in order to receive essential fixes. Full details are available [here](https://github.com/nodejs/package-maintenance/issues/119) (should we bring this into the package-maintenance repo?)

> | `superset`   | The package is maintained for versions of Node.js including both LTS and non-LTS releases. It may be necessary to accept semver-major level (ie. breaking) changes into that application in order to receive essential fixes. Documentation for the package will include the non-LTS releases for which the package is still maintained. 

Reviewer 3: I’m confused about this naming; it seems too generic and begs the question of what the “sets” are.

what about “active”?

Author: Fixed by #236

| `donations`    | The project can be funded by any donations.
| `open-collective` | The project can be funded by donations via `open-collective`.

### Support `expires`

The expire field defines the ending of the term of a support entry.
It is a string in the [ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) format.

This standard can express:
+ _a date_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z`): the value is the expiring date. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _time range_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z/2008-05-11T15:30:00Z`): the value is the range of validity of the supported version. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _only duration_ (ex: `P1Y2M10DT2H30M`): the value must be added to the last release date. This value is dynamic.

To understand if the version is expired or not, the user needs to do the operation for _duration_:

`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **>** `now` => the support is not expired
`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **<** `now` => the support is expired

### Support `contact`

> The contact field is a JSON that show to users all the possible channels to contact the maintainer that could be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The contact field is an object that shows to users all possible channels to contact maintainer(s):
```

- `security`: a contact for security issues
- `paid-channel`: a direct contact for paid support

> Each field is a JSON with more information like an external URL, an email or a project file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each field is an object with more information like an external URL, an email, or a project file.
```

```json
"contact": {
  "security": {
    "file": "./SECURITY.md"
  },
  "paid-channel": {
    "url": "http://support.it/paid-suport",
    "email": "mailto:paid-channel@node.js"
  }
},
```

> ## Authoritative

Author: May we suggest a `semver` value in order to change the support information?

like:

| Case | Semver |
|------|--------|
| Add support field    | minor |
| Change support field | patch |
| Remove support field | major |

Reviewer 7: I think it depends on the nature of the change.  For example, changing a contact email is a patch, but I don't think changing support target is.  I think we could say something along the lines of:

> Any decrease in support is a semver major

But that isn't much in the say of guidance, IMO.

Reviewer: Trying to tie an update to the release type seems wrong to me.  That would potentially cause users to not upgrade to a new version (since it might be marked SemVer) even though there is no reason from the API side for that.

I think we've kind of reluctantly agreed to tie updating the data to doing a release because people don't like other options (for example a live url), so I think that then resulting in it affecting how people upgrade to newer versions to the module being counterproductive.  

I can see the argument that reducing support is "major" but since it potentially applies to all versions of the module  having it prevent an upgrade to the newer version does not seem right.

> A published module may contain outdates support information, so the valid support information refer

Reviewer 7: I think we need to make this say the `latest` tag on the registry is the canonical source.

Author: Done

| `none`         | There is nobody backing this package
| `hobby`        | The single maintainer maintains the package for fun, does not get any support to continue maintenance.
| `sponsored`    | The single maintainer actively maintains the package but depends on sponsorship to be able to continue to maintain the package. Consider supporting this sponsorship through patreon etc.
| `bounty`       | The package is maintained through the use of a bounty service
| `project`      | The package is maintained under the auspices of a larger project (ex Node.js project).
| `foundation`   | The package is maintained and supported under the auspices of a Foundation.
| `company`      | The package is maintained and supported by a corporate entity but may not be related to their product or service offerings.
| `commercial`   | The package is maintained and supported by a corporate entity as part of supporting their products.
| `paid-support` | The package is maintained and supported through paid support contracts.
| `freemium`     | Basic version of the package it provided for free, premium version is available at a cost.
| `donations`    | The project can be funded by any donations.

> | `open-collective` | The project can be funded by donations via `open-collective`.

Reviewer 7: This is concerning to me.  If we codify Open Collective in this spec, then what happens when another platform comes along?  Do we add all platforms?

Seems to me a better way would be to remove this and recommend this go under "sponsored":

```
{ "sponsored": "https://opencollective.com/beaker" }
```

Reviewer 3: Also, where’s GitHub sponsors and tidelift, the two that i get funded by? :-) Wesley’s suggestion seems best.

Reviewer: I'm happy with the generic "sponsored" too.

Author: Update 👍

> | `open-collective` | The project can be funded by donations via `open-collective`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `sponsored` | The project can be funded by donations via `open-collective`.
```

Reviewer 3: description still mentions open collective

Reviewer 7: The `sponsored` tag is already present above.  I think this line should just be removed.

https://github.com/nodejs/package-maintenance/pull/220/files#diff-5102e935129bc62569b47296ee319941R210

This standard can express:
+ _a date_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z`): the value is the expiring date. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _time range_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z/2008-05-11T15:30:00Z`): the value is the range of validity of the supported version. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _only duration_ (ex: `P1Y2M10DT2H30M`): the value must be added to the last release date. This value is dynamic.

To understand if the version is expired or not, the user needs to do the operation for _duration_:

`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **>** `now` => the support is not expired
`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **<** `now` => the support is expired

## Authoritative Version

If the support information is delievered as part of a package, leveraging the ecosystem's existing package
manager (as is recommended for the JavaScript ecosystem at this point), the only way to update the support information is to publish a new version of the package. It also means that any version of the package except
the latest may outdated support information.  

> In ecosystems that follow this approach, tools to ensure they always pull the support information from the latest version of a published package.

Reviewer 7: I think we should explicitly say here that in the JavaScript ecosystem this means the `latest` tag from npm for a package.  Saying "latest" without being clear on its meaning here could mean people think "latest by date published".  We don't want a `--tag=next` which never gets a release without the tag to override the default installed version.

Reviewer 3: Agreed

> In ecosystems that follow this approach, tools to ensure they always pull the support information from the latest version of a published package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of a published package.  In the JavaScript ecosystem this means the `latest` tag from npm for a package.
```

# Baseline practice - Document support levels

> Package maintainers provide different level of support in the large npm ecosystem.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Package maintainers provide different level of support in the large JavaScript ecosystem.
```

We should likely generally avoid calling out `npm` specifically and instead focus on JavaScript or package registries in general.

Reviewer 3: I think while npm ships with node, it should always be called out specifically - it remains the default and primary package manager for javascript, for the foreseeable future.

Reviewer 7: I think @jasnell's point is more that this is true across JS projects whether published to npm or not, and to me this change is just more inclusive.  There is no reason we cannot use this proposal to help other ecosystems, even beyond just JavaScript.  👍 from me.

Reviewer 3: This is package.json - it doesn’t apply when not using npm.

I am strongly opposed to *not* calling out npm specifically.

Reviewer 7: > This is package.json

Is a separate file off the table?  I thought we were still considering that.

Reviewer 3: I have laid out many reasons why a separate file is and should be unacceptable; I’m sure i haven’t persuaded everyone.

Either way, package maintenance for node unavoidably involves npm - we can mention alternatives also if it seems necessary, but there simply isn’t an “in general” category yet, only a few fledgling attempts (github, entropic) and a few dead ones (bower).

Reviewer 7: > I’m sure i haven’t persuaded everyone.

Haha, well I have been on the fence and you have kept me on the fence.  The main reason I still see to have a separate file is that it can be updated separately from the package contents.  There is no other way to avoid that issue with immutable packages with mutable support commitments.

> ackage maintenance for node unavoidably involves npm

I guess I just see "JavaScript ecosystem" as being inclusive of "npm ecosystem".  Could we change this phrasing but then add something about the number of npm packages with support issues overwhelming development?

Reviewer 3: Outside npm, they’re not really the “packages” we’re concerned about imo.

Author: If the subjects are the "package maintainers", the ecosystem is not only in the npm registry (maybe the 99% it is). 

Since this file could be used by everyone, also in another registry, could we say
`Package maintainers provide different level of support for published module across all the JavaScript ecosystem like npm.`?

Reviewer 3: What ecosystems are we concerned about that don't end up on npm? What constitutes a "package" if it's not published to npm? People may install from git, but they're installing an npm package that happens to be on git instead of in a registry.

support information.

For each of these dimensions the potential options are not an ordered list.
Instead like licenses each ID will identify a unique option. If you wish to
identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within
this document considered "custom" and may ignored for flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

## Support file

The support informations are stored in a `support.json` file 
The recommended baseline practice is to include a file named `support.json` in the root direcotry of the project.

This file documents the maintainers expectations adding more useful metadata.

The file expects this example structure:

A `support` field with a `versions` key.
`versions` is an array of JSON that contains all the useful information detailed below.

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "^1.0.0",
        "target": "abandoned",
        "response": "none",
        "response-paid": "regular-1",
        "backing": [
          "paid-support"
        ],

>         "expires": "1 year",

Reviewer 8: While I'm not yet convinced that an `expires` field is necessary here, this should be expressed in the form of a validity period in ISO8601 time interval with an explicit start/end. For example `2019-03-01/2020-05-01` and `2019-03-01/P1Y`.

e.g. 

```json
{
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      ...
      "valid": "2019-03-01/P1Y"
    ]
  }
}
```

Reviewer 7: I see your point, but isn't the start date always the publish date?  Does that spec allow for optional start/end?  That way we could infer it as the publish date when start is missing.

Author: For sure a standard form is the best choice, but there is the format to avoid the start date in order to refer to "the last release"?

Author: Done

        "contact": {
          "issues": {
            "url": "http://support.it/issue"
          },
          "security": {
            "file": "./SECURITY.md"
          },
          "paid-channel": {
            "email": "mailto:iwantmoney@nodejs.com"
          }
        },

>         "funding": {

Reviewer 8: This appears to already be handled by the SUPPORT.md approach that GitHub is taking. I don't think there is need to provide yet another alternative way of expressing this here.

Reviewer 7: I am not sure these achieve the same thing.  Our goal is to provide tooling around this, and an unstructured `SUPPORT.md` filed does not really allow for that.  With a structure like this we could, for example, write a tool which scan's your project tree and finds all projects with an Open Collective and open your browser right to the correct page to make a donation (maybe even suggesting an amount based on how much usage it has in your project source). 

Do you think that this is a good reason to have this field?  Do you think that `SUPPORT.md` solves this use case?

Reviewer 3: I believe github’s repo md files do have a structure, but parsing markdown is a steep requirement to impose on an ecosystem.

I’d rather see the information in package.json as a a\source of truth, and the md files generated from that.

Reviewer 7: Yeah! that would be a great way to go about this.  Provide a tool which also generates a compliant GitHub `SUPPORT.md`.  Do you have a link to the structure, I didn't find it in my google?

Author: > This appears to already be handled by the SUPPORT.md approach that GitHub is taking. I don't think there is need to provide yet another alternative way of expressing this here.

Maybe here we could just add a link to it (if present)?
Because, thinking as a lazy maintainer, I would like to create one support file with all the info without creating it more than once so `and the md files generated from that.` from it is a good idea!

Author: Merged funding in backing

identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within
this document considered "custom" and may ignored or flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

## Support information

This field documents the maintainers’ expectations, adding more useful metadata.
For the JavaScript ecosystem it is recommended that this information be added to the existing
`package.json` file in the root directory of the project. For other ecosystems, it is recommended that
this information be stored in a file called `package-support.json` in the root directory of the 
project.

The json which is either added to the `package.json` file or stored in `package-support.json` is
as defined in the sections below.  

The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should be:

```json
  "support": {
    "versions": [
      {
        "version": "*",
        "target": { "node": "none" },
        "response": { "best-effort": { "url": "https://github.com/myproject" } },

>         "backing": { "hobby": "https://github.com/myproject" }

Reviewer 7: There is a discrepancy between this line and the line above.  Either both should have `{ url: ... }` or not.

Author: The `response` was wrong!
The url was a reference for the `contact` field: do you think we should still make uniform?

| `active`      | 10,12      | All releases not in maintenance
| `lts_active`  | 10         | All releases both LTS and active
| `lts_latest`  | 10         | The package is maintained only for the Latest Node.js version. You will be required to update to the latest LTS Node.js version in order to ensure you can use new versions/get security fixes
| `maintained`  | 12,10,8    | Node.js versions which are not EOL
| `current`     | 12         | The latest release from "all"

Based on the current active Node.js releases which are 8.x (Maintenance LTS), 10.x (Active LTS) and 12.x (Current).

### Support `response` 

The support response field quantifies how quickly the maintainer chooses to, or is able to, respond to issues. This field can be a single object or an array of objects. Each object contains the following:

* type
* paid (optional)
* contact (optional)

The contact field is an optional object, or array of objects, which includes:
* name
* email (optional)
* url (optional)

> Or you can shorten that all into a single string with this format: `name <email> (url)`.

Reviewer 3: that all → a given object

For example:

```json
response: [
  {
    "type": "best-effort",
    "paid": false,
    "contact": {
      "name": "Volunteers",
      "url": "https://github.com/myproject"
    }
  },
  {
    "type": "regular-7",
    "paid": false,
    "contact": "John Foo <john@foo.com> (https://john.foo)"
  },
  {
    "type": "24-7",
    "paid": true,
    "contact": {
      "name": "xyz customer service",
      "email": "help@service.com",
      "url": "xyz.com/service"
    }
  },
  {
    "type": "regular-1",
    "paid": true,
    "contact": [
      "John Foo <john@foo.com> (https://john.foo)",
      {
        "name": "xyz customer service",
        "email": "help@service.com",
        "url": "xyz.com/service"
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

This allows the package maintainer to provide contact information for each of the support options that are available.

> The standardize support identifiers are as follows:

Reviewer 3: standardized

| `none`         | Don't expect a response, the package is not being actively maintained
| `best-effort`  | The maintainer is interested in fixing/discussing issues, however, there should be no expectation on response times. If and when the maintainer has time they may respond.
| `regular-X`    | There are dedicated resources who regularly maintain the package, expected response time is X days or less for a "we read your issue" response. Further work will depend on prioritization of the issue by the maintainer team.
| `24-7`         | There are dedicated resources who regularly maintain the package and they are available 24/7. You can expect to be able to contact the maintainers and get an initial response with 6 hours.

### Support `backing`

This section provides information how the package is supported and how consumers can help support the package.
It can be a single object or an array of objects, for example: [x, y, z]. This supports cases where the
backing comes from more than one source. Each object consists of an identifier as defined below and an optional URL with additional information. For example:

```json
{ "foundation": "https://openjsf.org/" }
```

> The value can be an array of URL as well:

Reviewer 7: URLs

This standard can express:
+ _a date_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z`): the value is the expiring date. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _time range_ (ex: `2007-03-01T13:00:00Z/2008-05-11T15:30:00Z`): the value is the range of validity of the supported version. This value is strict and not dynamic.
+ _only duration_ (ex: `P1Y2M10DT2H30M`): the value must be added to the last release date. This value is dynamic.

To understand if the version is expired or not, the user needs to do the operation for _duration_:

`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **>** `now` => the support is not expired
`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **<** `now` => the support is expired

## Authoritative Version

If the support information is delievered as part of a package, leveraging the ecosystem's existing package
manager (as is recommended for the JavaScript ecosystem at this point), the only way to update the support information is to publish a new version of the package. It also means that any version of the package except
the latest may outdated support information.  

> of a published package.  In the JavaScript ecosystem this means the `latest` tag from npm for a package.

Reviewer 7: Did accepting the suggestion mess this up?  I think part of this paragraph got removed.

## Publishing

> If the support information is delievered as part of a package, leveraging the ecosystem's existing package

Reviewer 7: Is the first sentence of this paragraph is the same as the one above?  Maybe this should just be one section:

```markdown
## Publishing and Authoritative Version

If the support information is delievered as part of a package, leveraging the ecosystem's
existing package manager (as is recommended for the JavaScript ecosystem at this point),
the only way to update the support information is to publish a new version of the package.

Since an update to the support information does not affect code which consumes the
package a publish which updates only the support information can be considered SemVer
patch.  You might consider minor or major versions if the support model is changing in a
material way to consumers of your package.

Managing this information via releases means that any version of the package except the latest
may outdated support information.  In the JavaScript ecosystem this means the authoritative
version of support information is the `latest` tag from npm for a package.
```

Thoughts?

Author: I like this rearrange + the addition:

> You might consider minor or major versions if the support model is changing in a material way to consumers of your package.

  in the case of Node.js, the different versions of Node.js that the package supports.
* `response`: how quickly the maintainer chooses to, or is able to, respond to issues and
contacts for that level of support
* `backing`: how the project is supported

For each of these dimensions the potential options are not an ordered list.
Instead like licenses each ID will identify a unique option. If you wish to
identify your package with an option which is not yet listed, please PR your
option into the lists in the sections which follow. 
The values can be any string, those which are not documented in the lists within
this document considered "custom" and may ignored or flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

## Support information

This field documents the maintainers’ expectations, adding more useful metadata.
For the JavaScript ecosystem it is recommended that this information be added to the existing
`package.json` file in the root directory of the project. For other ecosystems, it is recommended that
this information be stored in a file called `package-support.json` in the root directory of the 

> project.

Reviewer 9: This seems to expect that the project is a downloadable package?

What if the project is instead provided over eg. HTTP? Then a `/.well-known/<something>` would be preferable?

Also: Has it been considered for such a file to also be discoverable through a link relation similar to `rel-license` links? Like a `<link rel="backing" href="<url-to-a-backing-json-somewhere>.json" />` on the home page of the project?

Or is it intended that all discovery of this data should just happen through a published package and the tools that interact with this package and that there is no use for eg. a browser extension to surface this very same information by making it discoverable on the web?

Reviewer 3: The latter paragraph. The target audience for the information is the developers consuming the package, not anybody interacting with it via a website.

Reviewer 7: The scope here is purposefully limited to packages (with a strong focus on node packages in the npm registry).  That said, I do not see any reason not to take the json format here and publish it as `./well-known/support.json` or any other version you mention.  I don't think we should add that to the spec at this time, but it seems a fine use of the shared schema.

this document considered "custom" and may ignored for flagged by any tooling that
consumes these elements.

> ## Support informations

Reviewer 3: “Informations” isn’t ever correct English; it’s a plural noun. Perhaps “information” is better here?

Author: Done 🙏🏼

This field documents the maintainers expectations adding more useful metadata.

> The support informations are stored in the `package.json` file in the root directory of the project.

Reviewer 3: perhaps “the support information”?

> If the the project is not a published Node.js module, the data must be stored in the `package-support.json`

Reviewer 3: I thought we were deferring “separate file” until npm offered the ability to both update without publish, and view without downloading the tarball.

Author: Reading this https://github.com/nodejs/package-maintenance/pull/220#issuecomment-516475639 I understood to add this notice already.

I can remove it and put in a separate issue so we don't miss those ideas 👍

Reviewer 3: The comment mentions that it depends on three things, meaning that pending those things, it shouldn’t be mentioned. Moving that info to a new issue seems like a good idea.

Author: Done https://github.com/nodejs/package-maintenance/issues/241

}
```

> The default for packages created by individuals for their own use should most often add this support's data:

Reviewer 3: support data?

`date of last release in the version range` **+** `expires value` **<** `now` => the support is expired

### Support `contact`

The contact field is a JSON that show to users all the possible channels to contact the maintainer that could be:

- `security`: a contact for security issues
- `paid-channel`: a direct contact for paid support

> 

Reviewer 3: URL is an initialism; it should be capitalized.
